+++
date = 2025-03-21T00:00:00-04:00
title = "The MPC is Hiring"
+++

The MPC is hiring! We have two positions currently open — one
[Astronomer][astro] and one [IT Specialist][dev] (i.e., software developer).
Both applications close on March 31st.

[astro]: https://trustcareers.si.edu/en/postings/64e9c581-1659-42a8-aee1-05bd867bdd63
[dev]: https://trustcareers.si.edu/en/postings/dde574e5-5d74-432a-b7e1-06ccfd4a7f2c

<!-- more -->

You should check out the links above for the formal descriptions of the two
roles. Less formally, I’d say that there’s a wide variety of work and science
that happens at the MPC and there are many different ways that a well-qualified
person could contribute to the MPC’s success. I personally came into the MPC
with essentially zero experience in minor-planet science (and it’s [only been a
few months][1] so that’s absolutely still the case) but that hasn’t hampered my
ability to get involved, or my level of interest in what I’m doing!

[1]: @/2025/the-next-chapter.md

The job ads have to be a bit more neutral, but I’ll take the opportunity to try
to sell the MPC a bit. Most narrowly, this is an important and exciting time for
the MPC: with Rubin/LSST coming online [soon][rsched], the there’s about to be a
boom in minor-planet science, as well as a five-fold increase in the rate of
data coming into the MPC. Just as we start getting used to The Era of Rubin,
NASA’s [NEO Surveyor][neos] will launch and ramp things up even more. All of
this will mean that MPC will have a lot of work to do, but our impact and
visibility will be higher too.

[rsched]: https://www.lsst.org/about/project-status
[neos]: https://science.nasa.gov/mission/neo-surveyor/

Of course, in these (cough) “interesting” times it’s hard to feel like you can
be at all sure what’s going to happen in a few months, let alone a few years.
But for what it’s worth, the funding for MPC (and a lot of that for Rubin and
NEO Surveyor) comes from NASA’s [planetary defense program][pdco]; that is, the
people who are worrying about city-destroying asteroids. Any scientist who tells
you that their funding is totally secure is either delusional or lying, but I
feel a lot better about MPC’s situation than some of the alternatives I can
think of.

[pdco]: https://science.nasa.gov/planetary-defense/

Looking beyond the MPC’s immediate future, I think there’s a ton of opportunity
for the MPC to make a much bigger impact on both science, and society more
broadly. As [I wrote before][1], I see MPC as a perfect harbinger of where
21st-century science is heading: more and more, your ability to accomplish
*anything* is going to depend critically on your ability to execute technology
projects, above all software projects. Historically, MPC hasn’t done a great job
of this, but my goal is to complete the task of turning that around. I’d love
for MPC to be seen as a leader both scientifically *and* technically, and my
sincere belief is that if you can excel on “both sides of the ball,” you’re
going to be *wildly* more successful than if you’re only strong on one side. If
you’re someone that feels the same way, please consider joining us!
