+++
date = 2023-12-04T14:40:41-05:00
title = "Launching a Newsletter, A Little Reluctantly"
+++

I’ve really enjoyed getting back into trying to write regularly, so I’m going to
take the next step and, yes, launch a newsletter. By this I mean something very
narrow: now you can [sign up][bd] to get brief emailed notices when I post
something new on this website. I’ve actually been quite tempted to just say that
I’m adding email notifications to my blog, but in today’s discourse everyone
talks about newslettering, so I’ll bow to convention.

[bd]: https://buttondown.email/pkgw

On the other hand, I want to be *extremely* clear that I have no aspirations to
become any kind of Monetizing Influencer Person — but given today’s internet
landscape (RSS is dead, as demonstrated by all of the people who feel the need
to argue that [actually][rss1] [RSS][rss2] [is][rss3] [not][rss4] [dead][rss5]),
it seems like a useful step despite the sour taste it leaves in my mouth.

[rss1]: https://www.wprssaggregator.com/is-rss-dead/
[rss2]: https://mikevdv.dev/blog/2022-06-12-is-rss-dead
[rss3]: https://medium.com/lost-but-coding/rss-isnt-dead-in-fact-it-has-never-been-more-alive-6d2e7d55ff30
[rss4]: https://www.reddit.com/r/digitalminimalism/comments/1186oqh/why_does_no_one_talk_about_rss_readers/
[rss5]: https://www.wesbaker.com/2021-02-17-rss-isnt-dead/

<!-- more -->

Why the sour taste? Thanks for asking! Here’s a lengthy essay you didn’t ask
for.

As you have probably noticed, the internet is terrible right now. Never Hungover
[put it well][1]: “to scroll the internet in 2023 is to feel, more often than
not, like you are the last person alive.” Wikipedia summarizes the [Dead
Internet Theory][2] by stating that it “asserts that the Internet now consists
mainly of bot activity and automatically generated content that is manipulated
by algorithmic curation, marginalizing organic human activity,” which is, like,
*obviously true*. The chief way in which Dead Internet is incorrect is the
insistence that this has to be a coordinated psyop — the emotional need for
tragedy to be imbued with meaning. Search is bad. Q&A sites are bad. Recipes are
bad. Social media is terrible. Journalism is a disaster. A firehose of
AI-generated garbage is going to make every aspect of everything even worse,
probably for the rest of all time.

[1]: https://www.neverhungover.club/p/matthew-lillard-and-the-dead-internet
[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dead_Internet_theory

One of the *many* dispiriting things about the 2023 internet is the shadow cast
by the influencer industry. I don’t have a problem with anyone trying to make a
living by influencer-ing — we all need to put food on the table, and it seems
like a hell of a lot more appealing job than many — but the inescapable striving
for eyeballs and clout takes what *should* or at least *could* be human
interactions, makes them transactional, and then the Remorseless Logic of
Capitalism™ kicks in to optimize them into paste. Unfortunately, that paste is
generally the antithesis of good writing. [Never Hungover again][1]: “the
overwhelming majority of human-generated internet posts hew to a set of codes,
memes, and take-formats that render their speech something like an imitation of
AI, rather than the other way around.” Writing becomes “content.” The recipe
must start with a long personal anecdote, even though neither the reader nor the
writer wants it. And so, although I’m not inclined to believe that small
children actually [learn that “don’t forget to subscribe” means “goodbye”][3],
the signifiers of SEO thralldom become deeply depressing. They indicate that
whatever you’re about to read is likely junk: “What’s *your* favorite methods to
remove tarnish from brass? Let us know in the comments!” “This post contains
affiliate links.” And, yes, “Please subscribe to my newsletter.”

[3]: https://twitter.com/tomgara/status/860938163526799362

That being said, if you can look past all of the engagement maximization and
paid product placements, there’s a basis to the influenceosphere that feels very
much like what the internet was “supposed” to be. Sometimes, it is genuinely
wonderful to connect with a person that you may never meet, who [may not even
know that you exist][7]. Now, anyone paying attention has seen that these
connections aren’t always positive: online forums can bring together isolated
queer kids, and also Nazis. But I’d like to believe that it’s at least
*possible* have a world where the good ones far outweigh the bad. And if the
magical power of near-instantaneous global telecommunications is largely used to
form parasocial bonds over funny pet antics and not, I dunno, lectures on
climate change, I honestly have trouble being very bothered by that.

[7]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parasocial_interaction

Another thing that strikes me is that this feeling of connection across space
and time is one that academics have experienced for a long time. I’d go so far
as to say that it’s one of the true joys of scholarship. I’m never going to meet
[Hannah Arendt][arendt] or [Edwin Jaynes][jaynes] but I still feel like I’ve
gotten to know them, and I’m glad that I have. There’s a bit of tension here
because what academics do is supposed to be about *ideas* and not *people*, but
after all, people are the ones that expose us to new ideas — influence us, if
you will — and there’s a pleasure in observing someone skilled at work. (Note
that this has no relation to how “hard” or “soft” one’s field may be — the
output may be more or less technical, but either way, there’s a person creating
it. That’s one reason that I believe that physical-science researchers should
reserve some mental space to include “scholar” as part of our professional
identities, even if it can feel a bit pretentious.)

[arendt]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hannah_Arendt
[jaynes]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edwin_Thompson_Jaynes

This gets at why I’m making a concerted effort to write more here. I harbor no
fantasies about rocketing to late-blooming academic stardom or securing a place
in history through a blog — and just the word “blog” feels pretty cringey in the
year 2023 — but if your job is to generate and spread new knowledge, it seems
like you ought to be writing things down! And for the academically inclined, the
blog format seems like a pretty good one. Some scholarly writing should happen
in refereed journal articles, but does everything need to reach that level of
formality? Surely not. Conversely, if you publishing something outside of a
traditional journal, is it necessarily low-quality? Of course not. 

I take a lot of inspiration from the blog of [David Bordwell][bordwell], a
professor of film studies at UW-Madison. He seems to have launched it (back in
2006) with what you might call [Air Bud] Mentality: “Well, ain’t no rule says a
blog *can’t* be a venue for serious academic writing”. The scholarly posts are
presumably not as refined as formal articles would be, but many are remarkably
polished, with framegrabs to illustrate his points and references at the end.

[bordwell]: http://www.davidbordwell.net/blog/
[Air Bud]: https://www.quotes.net/mquote/108214

Bordwell’s blog is also clearly an artifact of the pre-influencer internet. No
chasing virality, no SEO tics, no newsletter. Besides the timing, this is
partially a consequence of privilege in action: Bordwell writes from the comfort
of his tenured professorship, not while scrapping to make his name. Be that as
it may, stylistically, *wow* is it a breath of fresh air. Not that I’d argue
that he’s an exceptional prose stylist — but he writes well enough and is
obviously pursuing his interests, not whatever’s trending. It’s a satisfying
combination, and one that feels depressingly rare on today’s internet. (And it
seems likely to become yet rarer — sadly, Bordwell’s health appears to be
failing.)

All of this is to try to convey why I feel a bit icky about becoming a
Newsletter Guy. But I have to admit that I would actually like for people to
read the things that I write! And, *especially* given the inexhaustible torrent
of “content” flung in our faces every day, maybe some potential readers would
appreciate automated notifications about when I’ve posted something new. And
probably a lot of those people would prefer email-based alerts to [the RSS
feed](/rss.xml) or [reading the Toots][6]. So, I’m aiming to adopt my own Air
Bud Mentality: ain’t no rule says that if you call it a newsletter you *can’t*
write plainly about your intellectual interests. That's the hope, at least.

[6]: https://mastodon.world/@pkgw

In particular, the plan is just to email out links to posts on this site with
ultra-brief descriptions — one of the *many* ways in which I would make a
terrible influencer is that I hate spreading my virtual presence across dozens
of communication platforms. If it turns out that my future legions of adoring
fans want fulltext in the emails, I should be able to make that happen, but
links-only is easier for me right now.

I’m using a service called [ButtonDown][4], which appears to be a one-person
operation with pleasantly [Small Web][5] vibes. (Much of what I’ve written above
is right out of the Small Web playbook — something I may return to in the
future.) I found ButtonDown by Googling for “privacy oriented newsletter
service”, but you’ll notice that the emails do have click-trackers in them. I
don’t anticipate becoming obsessed with engagement metrics, but I’d like to at
least be able to get a sense of how many people are reading what.

[4]: https://buttondown.email/
[5]: https://neustadt.fr/essays/the-small-web/
