+++
date = 2024-08-08T12:45:41-04:00
title = "Addendum: Seven-Figure Scientific Software Projects"
+++

There’s at least one important point that I forgot to make in [yesterday's
post][sssp].

[sssp]: @/2024/seven-figure-software.md

<!-- more -->

I wrote that while software projects are in many ways like hardware projects,
one noteworthy difference is that they’re basically made *entirely* out of
people. While an established hardware development program is supported by
durable physical assets like lab equipment, an established software development
program is, to a very good approximation, completely intangible. This makes it
extra-important to provide stable, sustainable support for the people involved.
Of course, this is not to imply that such stability isn’t important for hardware
programs too, or that people who build hardware are interchangeable.

What I forgot to point out is that this is also the case for *core astronomical
research itself!* Most established research programs in exoplanets, gamma-ray
bursts, or whatever, are likewise made entirely out of people. I’m quite sure
that folks with more equipment-intensive programs, like lab astrophysicists,
would agree that what they’ve built is mostly about human expertise, rather than
the hardware.

And universities have a time-honored mechanism for recruiting and retaining the
experts around whom these research programs are centered. **You hire them and
you give them tenure.** It’s a decently successful approach.

This is really the thing that’s been bothering me. It is indeed very difficult
to recruit and retain the skilled professionals needed to build high-quality
software in a university context. But we already have the systems in place to do
this! We just need to collectively decide that software leads deserve
tenure-track slots.

Now it remains true that building astronomical software, like building hardware,
is not quite the same thing as doing astronomical research itself. The act of
writing software can (ideally) create tools that lead to new astronomical
knowledge; and, something that’s pretty underrated, it can help capture and make
explicit existing or previously-vague astronomical knowledge. But it doesn’t
create new astronomical knowledge *per se*. Furthermore, I’m particularly
interested in infrastructural software, which you could view as being an extra
step removed from knowledge creation: tools that help you create more tools.

And my impression — maybe it’s wrong — is that at the moment, to get hired onto
the tenure track as a tool-builder of either the software or hardware variety,
you need to have a story about how you’re going to bring in a lot of money to
support your activities. A plan to operate in artisan craftsmanship mode, just
you and an apprentice in the basement, won’t get you hired. Hence my focus on
grantmaking in [the previous post][sssp].

The other analogy to mention is that the commonplace uncertainty and
unpredictability of the software design process is *also* very reminiscent of
the uncertainty and unpredictability of scientific research itself. You try
stuff; you realize that your first plan wasn’t working; you pivot; something
surprising catches on with your colleagues. So in this way too, software
development should be a very comfortable fit for academia. Innovative hardware
development has the same features too, but for understandable reasons the
*speed* at which things in software can evolve feels a lot closer to the speed
at which the science itself can move.

All of this makes me optimistic that there’s a way to find a home for innovative
scientific software development — and developers — in the university system. But
it would certainly be a lot easier to do so if we had more well-established
avenues for PIs to get funding for substantial software projects.
