+++
date = 2024-10-17T11:44:21-04:00 # deploytool
title = "A Year of Blogging Dangerously"
+++

It’s been almost exactly a year since I decided to [get back into updating this
blog](@/2023/new-wwt-tutorial.md)! Let’s step back and take stock.

<!-- more -->

The short story is: I’ve really, really enjoyed getting back into the habit.
Simply put, I missed writing. If not for this blog, I certainly would have done
a whole lot less of it over the past year.

This is my [45th post](@/all-posts.md) since restarting. If you look at my
posting pattern, it ought to be clear that I’ve been aiming for an approximately
weekly cadence. But I haven’t tried to commit to a specific posting schedule,
and I made the explicit choice to let myself take a week off here and there as
needed. Thus far, at least, I’ve been able to keep up the motivation and
more-or-less regular posting without adhering to structure more rigid than that,
and I’m happy with where things are at.

It usually takes me about half a day to write a substantial post. This is a
non-trivial time investment! And some weeks, I’m feeling not-so-inspired, and I
deliberately choose to write [something short and easy](@/2024/adass-2024.md).
There are definitely mornings where I say to myself “Ugggh, I ought to post
something but I’ve got alllll this other stuff to do.” But overall, this has all
felt like a good use of my time. With the job role that I’ve had for the past
several years, if I wasn’t blogging I’d have *very* little to document what I’ve
been up to. You could certainly make the argument that instead of blogging I
should’ve been finding a way to turn my projects into refereed publications, and
maybe you’d be right. In the abstract, publishing is certainly better than not
publishing. But all I can say is that I don’t spend a lot of time agonizing
about the balance that I’ve struck. I think it’s important to be able to show
what you’ve been up to, but in many cases the “blog post” level feels sufficient
to me; you could imagine fleshing out some items into full papers, but honestly
it doesn’t feel like a good use of either my *or other peoples’* time. I hate
the idea of wasting everyone’s time with pages for formal text when a few
informal paragraphs would do, just to add another line to the CV.

And the other major piece is that where I’m at right now, publishing regularly
does *not* feel like it would actually contribute to my long-term professional
security. Maybe I’m wrong about that, but that’s my read of my situation.

Besides acting as basic documentation of what I’ve been doing, one very
rewarding thing is that I’ve found that blogging has been really useful at
helping me [develop](@/2024/layered-deployment-metadata.md)
[ideas](@/2024/seven-figure-software.md) from their initial seeds to something a
bit more well-rounded. I am a very, very big believer in the idea that the best
way to refine a thought is to try to write about it with some precision.
Obviously, at the half-day level of effort, we’re talking about getting things
to half- or perhaps three-quarters-baked, not fully baked, but I’ve really
enjoyed having an obvious space to do this kind of writing-thinking. There are a
lot of times when I’m genuinely looking forward to writing a post because I can
feel that it’s going to help me figure out something that I’ve been stuck on.
Now, it’s true that lots of ideas really ought to be developed into formal
scholarly publications; both the process and the end product are hugely
important — I’m not one of those people that thinks that nothing needs to go
past the preprint stage. But to be honest, not everything does; and writing
about an idea informally seems like a great way to gauge whether it’s worth
developing more fully.

Another *very* reassuring thing is that I’ve never come close to feeling like
I’m out of things to write about. I keep a simple list of post topic ideas in
case inspiration runs dry, but I’d say that in at least half of my weeks,
there’s something on my mind that causes me to think, “Ah, that’s a great topic
for this week’s post.” Sometimes it’s something external that caught my
attention, like [the Software Citation Station
preprint](@/2024/citation-station.md) or [a Mastodon toot about
LaTeX](@/2024/the-new-latex.md). Often it’s a project that I’ve been working on,
as in the [many](@/2023/dasch-website-sneak-peek.md)
[posts](@/2024/aas243-dasch-slides/index.md)
[about](@/2024/dasch-drnext-beta.md) [DASCH](dasch-astrometry.md) or
[HPC](@/2024/hpc-job-organization.md) [software
engineering](@/2024/elastic-hpc.md). In particular, it’s pretty gratifying to
feel like I’m bringing enough creativity to my “day job” work (DASCH, right now)
that there’s almost always something about what I’ve done recently that feels
interesting and worth sharing.

Those are all the positives. The big negative is that I still feel like I have
no idea if anyone is reading this. While I do have Google Analytics for my site,
I don’t even bother to look at the numbers, because it’s so hard to know what to
make of them; absolute calibration feels impossible. If Google told me that I
had 5,000 visitors in a day, I’d easily believe that only 5 of them were actual
humans. I feel like the only thing you can really do with these numbers is see
whether they’re trending up or down, and at the moment even the trends don’t
feel that important to me. In the same way that I don’t think that adding
refereed publications is particularly helpful to my professional security, I
*really* don’t think that a popular blog would be either. For the time being, it
feels better to focus on writing about whatever interests me, and let the chips
fall where they may.

That being said, I did have hopes that [adding a
newsletter](@/2023/newsletter.md) subscription mode would give me some insight
into who was reading and how things were going. Unfortunately the uptake has
been, how shall we say … laughable? Pathetic? So bad that I can’t bring myself
to post an actual number. This despite the fact that I’ve tried to emphasize
“[subscribe to the newsletter][sub]” as a call-to-action (CTA) nearly everywhere
on the site that makes sense.

[sub]: https://buttondown.email/pkgw

As a tangible example, a friend let me know that my [“LaTeX Can Be The New
LaTeX”](@/2024/the-new-latex.md) post made it to the front page of [Hacker
News][hn] for at least a little while. On the plus side, that’s wonderful
evidence that at least someone is reading. On the minus side, the event resulted
in zero new newsletter subscriptions. I’m sure that I could improve the CTA, but
is it seriously *that bad?* I could tell myself optimistically that maybe my RSS
feed is so incredibly appealing that it cannibalizes many people who would
otherwise subscribe to the newsletter, but that feels like wishful thinking.
(What makes RSS so nice is precisely what prevents it from being friendly to
analytics, and I wouldn’t have it any other way … but it would also be kind of
nice to be able to get some insight into who’s reading the feed!)

[hn]: https://news.ycombinator.com/

It’s true that I haven’t been advertising the newsletter anywhere *away* from
the site. In particular, one thing that (sort of) I wanted to try was asking
people to subscribe to the newsletter at the end of my professional talks — it’s
always kind of bothered me to end a talk without a particular CTA, and “like and
subscribe” may be annoying but there’s a reason it’s ubiquitous in other
contexts. I’ve never seen anyone do this in academia, and it would certainly
feel awkward as hell, but [as with the newsletter in
general](@/2023/newsletter.md): I think it actually makes sense? But as it’s
happened, I’ve hardly given any talks in the past year, so I simply haven’t had
the opportunity to see how it goes. (“Cite and subscribe”?) I’ll be speaking to
a large audience [at ADASS](@/2024/adass-2024.md) soon, though, so I’ll be able
to increase my sample size by one!

It should be pretty clear that I haven’t obsessing over traffic numbers in this
first year. Partially this is because I’m something of a [gentleman farmer][gf]
when it comes to blogging: this is a hobby, not my livelihood. I have to admit,
though, that there’s also a fear element — you can’t fail if you don’t try! That
can be a cozy lifestyle, but stepping back, I don’t love it. [Andy Wingo][aw]
recently wrote a relevant short piece titled, bluntly, [fedi [that is, the
Fediverse] is for losers][ffl], the point being that if you want to actually
make a difference in the world, you do have to get out there, get out of your
comfort zone, and engage with people. I don’t aspire to have millions of
followers, but in the end scholarship is about not just *having* ideas but about
getting other people to *adopt* them.

[gf]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gentleman_farmer
[aw]: https://wingolog.org/
[ffl]: https://wingolog.org/archives/2024/09/24/fedi-is-for-losers

But as of today, I don’t have a detailed vision for Year Two of the blog; some
of that will depend on what exactly happens with my employment as a researcher,
which is still up in the air. At a minimum, though, I certainly plan to keep at
it. As the folks at [Defector] often say: Onward!

[Defector]: https://defector.com/
